PROGRAMMING FOR EVERYBODY
What all you said all of those really amazing which fascinates me that by using programming 
so much but I know little of it so. Do u think anybody can learn it? So that’s a good question, 
this is the frequently asked questions that can I learn programming?  I would say 
programming is the actually quiet common seneschal. But there is one problem that a student 
faces majorly that is a whole lot of discouragement so it’s like if you come and tell me you 
want to learn French and I start of giving you literature in French, that you obviously will be 
discouraged. First point, second point is when you have someone around you who is doing 
really well with programming that’s the second form of discouragement, That’s the huge form
of discouragement that you should be there is a popular tip for chess players when you want 
to learn chess you should not play with a champion, you should play with someone who is 
like you may be slightly better but not a lot better right? So second discouraging factor for 
someone to learn programming is that they end a felling extremely discourage by looking at 
someone who does really well. First one is whole lot of details we start with some 
complicated stage of programming we don’t start from scratch, secondly people around you 
sort of discourage you and put you off. A one word answer to your question is YES in fact 
any one can program and it’s fairly easy process. So can you ball juggle? If I give you three 
balls can u juggle?  It’s quite difficult.  It’s quite difficult. Right? But you see in about a week
or two weeks time anyone can learn ball juggling it’s all a matter of practice so programming 
is also that it is in fact much much easier then learning a new language and its very very 
common seneschal so in this course what we will be doing is we will be ensuring that we start
from something that is not programming but it is a lot of fun to do and then slowly introduce 
you all to python programming right? Again not through whole lot of details and the do’s and 
don’ts for programmers but we what we will be doing is will be making you solve a problem 
and then learn a concept in programming. I think this is the fun way to learn programming 
than learning the old school way of reading a entire book on a programming language and 
trying to do everything parallel and not knowing why is this even used and how to go about 
doing this and what not exercise problems that you don’t understand things like that, so the 
whole of this course will mostly be focused on, you pick a question, you try to answer it and 
while you are answering it you will be learning a concept.
Why Programming?
One of these questions that many people have is why do we even programmed? Right?  What
is the need for it? U seems the digital world most of what you see on your cell phone on your 
computers or be it on the internet webpage all of these are the in fact some programs. 
Someone should have written a piece of code for all these things tats it if I can tell you in one 
sentence what is programming? It’s about getting things done really really fast right? You can
always ask me this question can we replace? Can we do without computers? Can we do 
without any of these programming? Off course yes we can. The point is it makes us life really
really really simple, it makes it really fast and nice for you to execute a piece of talk for 
example If you where to go to your huh train reservation system right? And see when exactly 
you had travelled from this location to this location. It’s very easy for you to put a search 
query inside your reservation website and see where all you have travelled. Otherwise you 
should maintain a big log of where you go what you have done and then you may have to 
search through it manually. Let’s say for instance I am travelling from Delhi to bang lore ok, 
what do I do? I go to the railway station ensure that the my name is there on the chart board 
the train and my friend is checking whether the train has started on time or not so that he 
knows it reaches on time and he can even trace where the exactly my train is. And has I am 
having my journey I open YouTube and then I can watch a good video may be good movie, 
right?  And then I can send a couple of emails to my friends and then I reach Bangalore after 
reaching Bangalore, I open my cell phone and then try booking a taxi through the popular 
application. Right? And then I reach back home and pay the taxi person the money that my 
phone tells me to pay. You see the entire thing from boarding my train until reaching my 
home I have been using applications all of them not even excluding one all of them  are bits 
and pieces of programming. A whole lot of programming the whole of digital world is of 
been made of these programming only and the atomic blocks of it how exactly do we  go 
about getting programming done is what we will be initiating you all with. So you mean to 
say every step of our life every day every minute some where we are using programs? Almost
every where we are using it today I can say because you see, you got to a shop and you do 
online transfer pay it though your favourite application to the shop keeper in fact every shop 
keeper these days they have one application or the other through which you can transfer 
money to them right? So we can hardly imagine a life today without digital way of handling 
things let’s say we pay money or we getting Amazon getting your favourite product delivered
through Amazon it all involves the digital world and by digital world that’s the system what 
happens in this world is the whole lot of code, whole lot of programs where in you precisely 
tell a computer what to do what not to do how to handle exceptions and things like that. 
SCRATCH ANIMATION 1
So let’s do one thing, you can in fact take some other object here not necessarily a cat. How 
about taking an aeroplane and making it take off, take off exactly it will go for some time on 
the ground and then take off, go for some time in air and then land let’s say, how would you 
do this?  Make it move forward, ok! Chase the angle of the aeroplane gradually may be and 
move it straight perfect. And then again change the angle, change the angle perfect right and 
move it straight, straight! I also told you it should also land and then rotate it again, rotate 
back and then land it down, land it down you must ensure that you don’t land like this, 
gradually come like this and then go ahead ok? Shall we try to see if we can do it or not? 
Yeah. Ok perfect. 
So let us try to build the programme for aeroplane taking off and then landing so first of all 
what we need do here is, we have cat as the sprite here and we need aeroplane! So how can 
you do that? In scratch you have many different options of sprite, here you can go to new 
sprite you can choose any sprite from the library, so I will just do that just click on it and see 
how many sprites do you have? You can choose any one, any sprite that you want so here 
since we need aeroplane, I will just click on it you just double click and you will get sprite 
here on your scratch screen, now we have aeroplane and cat sprite here so we need only 
aeroplane so I will just delete the cat sprite here just right click on the sprite and select option 
delete. So here is the aeroplane and I want to reduce it size since it won’t fit into the screen of
scratch so I just you can even increase the size of the sprite as well as decrease the size of the 
sprite and now but I want to shrink it so I will just use shrink there are two options here as 
you can see, one is grow and another is shrink so I will use shrink here just choose it and 
click on the sprite and yes it is shrinking so here we have the sprite. Yeah! I think this is the 
perfect size for the aeroplane that it can fit into our screen ok, so I think you know how the 
aeroplane takes off and then land let us try to build the programme for this, scratch 
programme for this. So first of all, what do we need to do here is? We have to move the 
aeroplane on the run way yes! We have to move the aeroplane on the run way so I will just 
click on the motion category and we have move options so first of all I just click here move 
ten steps ok so maybe I want to move it twenty steps or fifteen steps say so let us try to do 
that, it is just moved fifteen steps but since we need aeroplane, we need to show aeroplane 
running on the run way I will use move with the delay options, how can you do that? So first 
of all I will just say move five steps and then I will insert a delay and then move ten steps and
insert delay and then move ten steps insert delay and this way you can see the aeroplane 
moving on the run way, I will just show you what is the difference, here if I just enter move 
fifteen steps here we have it will just move fifteen steps but if I enter move five steps and 
then insert some delay and then I insert one second delay and after that I insert move ten steps
how will it move? Let us see? Here move five steps, move ten steps here you can see the 
aeroplane moving and it looks good to see the aeroplane moving this way on the run way 
rather than just having fifteen steps in one go so for that you have to insert a delay, how can 
you insert delay? With wait option and where if the wait option? Wait option will comes in 
the control category, in control category you have wait one second ok in this way you can 
make the aeroplane move on the run way, first of all, we have to move the aeroplane on the 
run way and that is done, so what is next thing to do? Then we have to rotate the aeroplane, 
yes by some degrees so here we have turn fifteen degrees so I will just use this option I will 
just say turn fifteen degrees here since it has to rotate on the left side I will just use this option
here you will have to move, you have to turn the aeroplane by fifteen degrees after that I will 
again like to insert a delay so, I will just insert wait one second after that it should move some
steps so I just write move ten steps yes so let us have a look how does, how does it look like 
here in scratch? First one move five move ten then rotate and then move ten steps yes, it look 
perfect! So let me try to run it again so that you get the clear idea of, how it is functioning 
here, first of all move five then ten then rotate then again move ten, yes this looks perfect. 
This is how aeroplane should take off, yes. So here we have the aeroplane taking off after that
the plane was the plane is rotated by fifteen degrees? After that what we can do here is, we 
can move it by some steps, you can move the aeroplane by say hundred steps for that what 
you have to do here is? For that I will again like to insert a delay here so let us insert the 
delay here and wait one second and then I will again go to the motion category and I have to 
rotate, I have to move the plane by hundred steps, so instead of ten you have to write hundred
here ok? Now we are done with rotating and moving the aeroplane in the air ok, once it has 
reached the position let us try to run this piece of code. It rotates and then it moves ten steps 
and then it moves hundred steps, so now our aeroplane is in air, now again what should we 
do, we should rotate it by fifteen degrees, so again we have to rotate the aeroplane by fifteen 
degrees for that I will again insert a delay here so that it looks kind of real and now I have to 
rotate it, so last time we rotated it left hand side now we will rotate it to the right hand side. 
So we will use this option, turn fifteen degrees after that what should we do? We should 
move the aeroplane by some steps in the air after it has been rotated so just take move ten 
steps, after that again insert delay, wait one second so I will just run this piece of code so that 
you can get the clear idea of what is happening over here, yes. So let us try to run it, move 
five steps move ten steps and rotate then move ten steps and then again hundred and then 
rotate and then move ten steps, this is how aeroplane is working here. Now we have the 
aeroplane in the air, it is moving in the air for that to make it look real what you have to do 
here is, we have to move it by say twenty steps and then wait for some time then move 
twenty steps and then wait for some time I will insert this code again and again so that it 
looks real that the plane is moving in the air so let us do that. I will just write here move say 
like no no no ah this is wrong, here I will just write move twenty steps then wait for one 
second then move twenty steps again and wait for one second ok I will insert it again move 
twenty steps and then wait for one second ok once more we have to insert it, move twenty 
steps and then wait for one second ok so now our aeroplane is moving in the air ok? Let us 
try to run this piece of code, so that you can get the clear idea of what is happening, move 
five steps move ten steps then turn and move ten steps and move hundred turn move ten 
twenty twenty twenty twenty so it has moved twenty steps four times, that means it has 
moved eighty steps ok, now we have to in order to land the aeroplane we have to again rotate 
it so, I will just use the option of rotate here, what we have to do here is we have to turn the 
aeroplane by fifteen degrees again so we have to turn the aeroplane again  by fifteen degrees 
so I will just use it, turn by fifteen degrees and then move ten steps also with that after that 
you should wait for one second, wait for one second say and then what we have to do here is 
we have to move the aeroplane down in the downwards direction, so you have to move the 
aeroplane down, so I will just move the aeroplane by some, by some steps here so I will just 
write move say fifty steps here, after it has moved fifty steps here then you have to again 
rotate the aeroplane, after it has moved fifty steps you have to again rotate the aeroplane so 
what do we need to do with that? For that we have to use the turn option so then as an always 
inset some delay and then use the turn option you have to turn it by fifteen degrees and then 
you have to move ten steps again and then wait for some time after it has rotated now it is on 
the run way again because it is landing, since it is landing then you have to move it by some 
steps, it is your choice how much steps that you want to move here, I will just use wait I just 
use move ten steps here and then wait for one second, wait for one second then again I will 
move it by ten steps so let us try to run this again and see how this aeroplane is taking off and
landing so it goes up in the air then it moves there for some time and it rotate and comes 
back, see we did a mistake here while taking off we moved it by hundred steps but while 
landing it is only moving by fifty steps, so what we will do, I will again insert move here and 
this time I will move it by fifty steps so that it looks real and again you have to insert a delay 
so that it doesn’t appear has crashing on the ground so again will run it, double click and run 
yeah it is going ahead in the air then straight for some time about eighty steps then it has 
coming down and then again come down and now it is on runway ok, so this is how you can  
make the aeroplane take off and land in scratch through a scratch programme but you can see 
that there are many repetitive instructions here, we are using for example here we are rotating
it by fifteen degrees then moving it by ten steps and again we are using this code again and 
again so what we can do here is we can actually group them in a repeat loop. I hope you are 
already familiar with the loop concept here so what will we do, we will group the repetitive 
instructions here so that it becomes easy for us to write the programme and the programme 
becomes short so what we will do here is for the repetitive instructions we just we will just 
group them in one loop, I will just use the repeat loop here for example here we have move 
five steps then wait then move then turn then wait move then move by hundred steps and wait
so we can’t insert a repetitive loop here because here we are moving by ten steps and in the 
next step we are moving by hundred steps then turn then move, move, move wait move wait 
here we can insert a repeat loop here because we are moving twenty steps four times so we 
can insert a repeat loop here and we can repeat it four times this set of instructions move 
twenty steps and then wait for one second after that we have to move turn then move then 
move move turn and then move and then we have to move again and again so ah I will just 
insert a repetitive loop here, a repeat loop here four times in place of this instructions so what 
will I do is, I will just copy this but we have to do just duplicate it and keep it here so I will 
just insert a repeat loop here in place of move twenty  and wait one second ok? So what will I
do here, I just take this loop and what we have to do, we have to repeat it four times yes and 
you can now delete this and insert it here so let us now, see how this programme with 
repetitive loop works. So let us see, it is moving then again in the air then straight one two 
three four yes perfect then it is coming down and then landing yes!! So as you see this 
programme is same as this programme but the length is somewhat shorter because we used a 
repeat loop here, so let us now get back to sir and see what is happening in the other end.        
Where To Start?
I have heard people telling that computer has some languages? People understand only 
certain set of rules and like also heard that something called C, C++. But I don’t really   know
where to start because some say for this you know, you have to know this. And some say for 
this u have to know something else so I don’t really know where to start programming? Yes 
there is a huge confusion for a beginner. Where to start? What to do and things like that. You 
see talk about programming language people talk to you about python, C, C++, what not 
right? So let me tell you something, most of these things have one thing in common and that 
is to understand what programming logic is. Right? There are some three to four most 
important skills that one must develop. That should be more than enough. Once you develop 
that you in fact can converse in its like the art of articulation, if you know how to talk well 
after learning a language I am sure you can do well in that language. Ok? Learning many 
languages is different from the art of articulation so the art of articulation analogously 
translates to understanding what is called the programming logic. You will see more of it 
during the run offer course let me tell you that it doesn’t really matter which programming 
language you learn. What matters is to understand how to think like a computer scientist by 
that I mean how to ensure that your brain can actually think how to solve piece of problem 
using programming. For that I would strongly suggest that you people go by the course, the 
course is going to assume nothing but we will be teaching python. Python is considered to be 
a very easy and quick language to learn at the same time extremely powerful. Right! 
Why Do We Have So Many Languages?
I have one more question, why do you have so many languages? Why can’t you have just one
universal language? Or is it necessary to have so many languages?  So this questions answer 
is slightly tricky that even I don’t think even I know the right answer for this question, but if I
ready to ask u the  same question why do you have so many languages in the world people 
speak right?  You have look at our country like India we have so many languages and let 
alone that dialects 100’s of them, right. So the reason is some people find so laze and comfort
in getting a few tasks done using a particular type of programming language and it develops 
with time. Then they realize, ok if this kind of programming language is used for, let’s say for
scientific purposes only it is not helping us in building any business application and then they
switch to a customize programming language and say, so this we will use for business 
oriented applications, for example Pascal was a general purpose programming language, 
Fulton, I am talking about 30-40 years ago ‘Fulton’ its stands for formula translator ok? That 
was mainly used for scientific reasons and then came ‘COBOL’, ‘COBOL’ was used for 
common business oriented language that’s what It stands for, it was used for business 
oriented applications. And then they thought ok fine we need something really rob stand  nice
and then they came out with C and then they realize in C there was lot of problem s when a 
programmer was programming, it was not easy on his mind so they created this notion of 
objects and that was the birth of object oriented programming.  Right, there is very good 
difference between C and C++. C++ helps a person program better by keeping his mind free 
from any sort of ambiguity and confusions when he is coding. And then came python because
python was known to be sort of they kept in mind the physiology of program. C to C++ are 
big leap then the python was like everyone should program, how do we go about doing that 
and then since its open for lot of people contributed to it and today its stand really tall as a 
fantastic programming language. So it is all evolution of mans thinking based on the need for 
something, that’s the good question by the way. Yeah was slightly thinking as you said it was 
evolved to us that what I can generalize from what you have told now, so do you think it will 
further evolve will be further move ahead or.. that’s again a very interesting question again I 
am not so sure whether I know the answer off course yes I personally believe that next 
generation will one thing is for sure I have been observing the programming is getting easier 
and easier with time. Firstly because of the available online resources, secondly because of 
the inherent ease with which you can code with the kind of tools and techniques available 
today. For example I am not sound little technical don’t mind there is something called 
integrated development environments IDES where it makes your life really simple to write a 
piece of, it’s like you are talking in some language if you make a mistake you have a 
earphone small earphone where you hear you made a mistake here you correct it. Or you are 
typing something and you make a typing mistake and your word processor says this is the 
right spelling not just that it corrects it automatically or says there is a possible grammar error
here I am just giving you analogies  right, even in programming there are such beautiful what 
is called IDEs which helps you program really really better to the future of programming 
would be any one can program any amount of it and with the whole lot of confidence and the 
skill set require for one to program back in 80’s is very different from what it is today in fact 
there are software’s called scratch a very popular one which I am going to teach you people 
to begin with you will see the actually fun to program it’s a whole lot of fun to program in 
fact you can develop a games of your choice by using tool called scratch. Will see more of it.
How To Give Instructions
So let’s do one thing, so you all know the age old way of doing a paper boat, observe carefully. How
is a paper boat done? We take a sheet of paper ok? A very clear to you people from this angle but i am
sure most of u already knows how to make a paper boat. Now imagine these two people are robots!
They know nothing. Do you know how to make a paper boat? Probably not! No! Correct good. So I
will teach you step by step, you follow exactly what I do. Firstly this is a rectangle, this is a rectangle
right? I wish to make a square out of it, how do i do that? Just follow whatever I am doing, we can
keep it here. May be you can tear this, all that we did was we made this rectangle, a square. Right? By
crossing it like this and that’s the way you make a square. Right? And simply do whatever I am gonna
tell you people. Collect all the papers here, look at this, fold it once like this and fold it again like this,
simple ok. Show it to everyone so that they can see what we are doing and then you see what’s
happening here, off course I am not going to teach you how to make a boat in this course but I am
trying to tell you people that we give instructions and people follow and we get things done. Ok let’s
go ahead now fold this like this take one leaf of this and fold it like this and the rest three leafs will be
folded on the other side. This reminds me of my school days! So then u knew how to make a boat is
it?  No they never taught you, rarely I remember ok! Ok. Good. So what you do is you can you should
fold it like this basically you should put your finger inside and fold it like this and you will get
something like form of a kite and then pluck this out, pluck this out like this and you will get a boat.
Tada! Done? all of you, what is it that I did just now? I instructed a couple of people here on how to
make a boat and here we have three boats. Correct? so similarly we probably can now make a plane
out of paper or any origami art, I do it, I give instructions step by step and you also do it. If you fail to
understand my steps you will not be able to get the boat as simple as that. So! Not the exact boat, u
may get the some other shape or u may not end up u might end up u might end up not getting a boat
finally! Right? So what if we get stuck in middle and it’s not opening it at all, you force it open it will
tear ha ha ha, you will be tearing a sheet right? So the point I am trying to make is by following a set
of instructions he accomplishes something that I ask him to accomplish, similarly your computer can
actually understand your instructions, when you instruct the right way. Imagine i instruct! I tried
giving this instruction in Telugu or Kannada or French or Italian or some other language which you
don’t understand, you will not able to accomplish it or if there are any ambiguity in the instruction
you will not be able to accomplish it. Right? So what is important here is to talk and give instruction
in a way that whether it’s a computer or a human being you are instructing in a way that the other end
the computer understand what you are instructing. Right! Any questions? We didn’t discuss anything
to have questions oh go ahead! I will just sum up so just told that whatever instructions we give for
the other person it must be very clear, crystal clear. Clear, ambiguous, is it to follow and he must be
able to produce whatever you are trying to ask him to produce him or her? Right? Ok so this way we
actually make a computer listen to you, take your instructions and then accomplish it and computers
have a capability of accomplishing something really really fast right.                         
Introduction To Programming
Welcome to the NPTEL course, ‘The joy of computing”. I plan to start with the very informal
session with the couple of my friends sitting here, ravikiran and sowjanya, maybe we should
say hi to everyone. So I have handpicked a couple of my students who know little about
programming and I would like to see how I can teach them the joy of computing. So initially
this session will be more of asking questions and then answering, mostly asking questions
from your side and I will try to answer at my best ok? So why are you people here firstly?
Basically I want to learn programming. Right, have you tried learning programming before
any time? I just tried but it seem to be really difficult sort of. So difficult hasn’t you have tried
programming and you found it extremely harder task to program is it? Or is it that you find it
disinteresting? It is interesting but there is a notion that programming is difficult so there is
that clear in us that programming is difficult so. That’s true many people find programming is
very difficult any particular reason why you think programming is difficult? Because the
teacher who taught me was directly started that “rules should be followed” and the actual
procedure there was no joy or there was no fun in it. Right, so have you used programming
anywhere,  let’s say you had a real life situation and u felt the need to write a piece of code
and then validate it and verify it or have you used programming anywhere outside your
curriculum, let’s say apart from course on programming huh first course on programming I
am sure these days high school have, high scholars learn programming right very basic stuff
and given that you people have mathematics background off course you would have learned
some packages software and even programming for that matter so outside your curriculum
have u tried learning something? Not really. Have  you felt the need to oh here is a place
where I think I should get to my desk try to write a piece of code and then to see what’s the
output, has that happened ever? No I have never felt the need or urge to. So the course will
actually be full of that in fact we will be giving you, ok we will clear ting occasion to feel the
in need to go write a piece of coded and then see what would be the output. Right? And most
of the course will be simply trying to mimic a game, stimulate a game and then try to play
with each other on the computer right. Heard of rock, paper scissors. Yeah so we have seen
where couple of people will be playing, rock paper scissors and then person feels the need to
write the computer program for it. And there are many more instances where we create that
desire in you to see, if this can be programmed and seen right? Ok. 
SCRATCH ANIMATION 2
So you people saw that we could make a cat move. Scratch gives you a whole lot of 
possibilities in fact, I can make you people move, you want to see how? Yeah. So what we 
will do is, we will take a picture of Ravi kiran and make him do exercise by writing a piece of
code. In fact you will be, you will just give me two poses I will take a picture of these two 
poses and then I ensure that I make you move around so much it looks like you are 
exercising. Ok? Get up let’s take a picture. 
Hello everyone in the video we saw that we took the photo of Ravi’s so that we can create a 
simple scratch programme there he is exercising. So we took two photos of him let me show 
you, these are the first photo he is standing and the next photo he is waving his hand, his 
hands are one eighty degree and his legs are stretched. See we are going to use these two 
images to create simple exercising programme. So we make Ravi jump and exercise using 
these two images. So let’s see this so what I will do this is my, I opened my scratch profile, 
you can see that there is a sprite ok? Which is the default sprite sprite that is a cat instead of 
this I need ravi’s picture so that I can use it so attaing to we will hide this you can right click 
on it and hide this hide this sprite and here you can see there is a upload button you can 
upload your own images and create sprite from there so I will upload the Ravi’s image one is 
this ok? You can see since this image is rotated in left side and i need to rotate it ninety 
degree ninety degree right foot that I will go to the info you can see there is a I icon I will go 
there and i will rotate it tats it. Ok. This is done, let me hide it for time being let me upload 
the next image this is there again this is also rotate it ninety degree left and I need to rotate it 
ninety degree right i will go to the info rotate it ninety degree this is done. Let me show this 
ok? So what I am doing them is hiding it showing it hiding it showing it so when I do you can
see that it looks like exercising or getting to different different position see so it looks like a 
animation if I do it little bit fast then it will look like he is actually exercising so we can 
create such kind of animations through images, this is what actually animators do, they create
different still images and then they play it in a very high frame rates so that it looks like the 
person is moving in the actually moving looks to our eyes that the person is actually moving 
so this is exactly what we are going to do so I will be using this sprite only so whatever 
function i am going to put on this sprite only this the second image so what I will do I think 
you got in tuition what I am going to do. Now I will create a repeat block here ok, what I will 
do I will go to motion let me check where are the show ok? Show and hide is there so first 
time we will hide this image ok? And after this I will show the image let me let’s try this I am
going to do this for ten times ok. It looks like nothing is happening but actually so many 
things are happening but since there is no delay in the between it looks like he is on still bit it 
went too fast that it look that he is in single position so what I am going to do, let me first 
show and then hide, ok so what i am going to do, I am going to put a delay let me see when 
the delay ok wait after showing wait for one second and after hiding also wait for one second 
ok, now let’s see awesome! Great! So this is all what we are going to do, so it looks like that 
he actually, he is exercising but we all know that by using the images we did this, he dint do 
anything so such kind of animation is easily possible in scratch and you can do a lot of things 
in scratch by set simple, simple techniques which people know so you can create your own 
animation you can create your own series of images you can have series of images you can 
have beautiful animation through this. You can download this scratch also for example, I am 
using this offline you can see this offline scratch 2 editor, so you can download this scratch 
tools in your pc and you can use it offline also thank you. 
Ok, that was so much fun seeing Ravi kiran workout, Ravi kiran I think you should not play 
this animation for the mornings exercise replacements definitely I will use that only! I don’t 
think you will lose any calories if you keep watching them, you probably gain calories so 
what you should do is maybe, you should use it as a reflection motivation he looks so 
energetic when he does the jumping jacks you see, so when you do jumping jacks you might 
lose out energy after two or three minutes but if you play the animation the energy looks 
intact may be, it can see as your mirror reflection and you can work out, you should try doing
that ok, how about you doing an exercise problem right now? Why don’t you do what is 
called knee rise, a knee rise is you should lift your left knee put it back and then a right knee 
it will look like stationary jogging ok? One! Another one sis you should try moon walking 
animation for moon walking, you know what is moon walking? Have you seen Michael 
Jackson do a moon walk? Moon walk is about walk, it appears as though you are walking 
forwards but you will actually be moving backwards ok, try taking a couple of pictures and 
try making it appear as though you are moon walking second Exercise.                                 
MORE ABOUT LOOPS
We know performed one of the major tasks in programming called the looping, we told you 
how we can make our cat reside the multiplication tables, well we made our cat do some 
mental exercise you see it is time for us to make her do some physical exercise. We will make
her move back and forth by using our programming skills. Ok, friends see I have written a 
very long code, very patiently I have tried writing this code what exactly is this code? Look at
this, initially I am going to move twenty steps take a half a second break there and then come 
back twenty steps, half a second pause go ahead forty steps see it’s like first day cat moves 
twenty steps and comes back next it goes forty steps and comes back sixty steps comes back 
minus sixty steps, eighty steps and then comes back and so on as you can see so on so on, so 
on, move hundred, minus hundred move one twenty and then minus one twenty which means
come back move one forty and then come back one sixty, one eighty, two hundred and then 
come back as  you would have guessed, if you have guessed this cat will now keep moving 
ahead like this incrementally will get bolder and bolder and move away from her house, she 
will try going as far as possible, let’s see how this works by double clicking on this. Double 
click; ahead back, back, ahead back go ahead back, go bolder and bolder go twenty steps 
ahead twenty steps ahead and finally stop once you reach two hundred steps. Correct? Let’s 
do this once again and then watch one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine and ten so
twenty steps, two hundred steps which is ten perfect, now I have a question for you all, she is 
doing basically ten ahead’s and ten backs in succession right, is there any way I can use a 
repeat loop and then put something so that the same thing can be achieved by making her by 
do something ten times without going through this ordeal of writing this big of code, now 
what am I trying to say, is there any way you can use this and reduce this to a smaller code, 
because its looks like we are repeating the same stuff but these values are changing correct? 
How do we go about it? Can you now figure out by looking at all the options here, if you can 
do this all by yourself, we strongly suggest that you spend at least fifteen to twenty minutes 
time figuring out, how you can achieve the same thing using the repeat loop, if you cannot 
solve it get back and continue watching the videos.          
Any Prerequisites
Do I need to know something else pre-requisites? Ok. There is absolutely no pre-requisites 
assumed for the course, all you need to know is you must understand what I talk tats the only 
pre-requisite, some amount of computer handling, let’s say if u know how to handle your key 
board and if you know how to click on something and open what is called a python terminal 
that should be more than enough. Right? If you just follow our instructions you should be 
able to do that.
How To Go About Programming
So you have told us that programming has evolved to be very easier these days, so can you 
tell us how we will be leaning or how we go about programming in this course? So in this 
course, we are going to start from scratch. By scratch I mean absolutely nothing. We only 
assume that you know how to use your mouse and your keyboard that’s it ok and from there 
we are going to go ahead and teach you almost everything of what one is supposed to know 
in programming right? At the end of the course you will be ready to call yourself a 
programmer and you can actually start programming some non tribunal things. So you mean 
to say after twelve weeks of the course I will be really ah knowing all the requirements of 
requirements to write a piece of code. See this I should, I should probably take a pause and 
then I should make you all realise that programming is a whole lot of practice. It is probably, 
it has two steps, one is you need some motivation to programme, that the course is giving you
in abundance. No doubts about it, secondly you need to do a whole lot of practice, practice 
comes with, you should be inspired, you should be some sort of self motivation, you should 
sit with your friends and then talk to them and then see if there is something that you can take
up as a challenge and then write a piece of code and then see the output that is something that
we should gradually cultivate right? With time. This is more like singing, you see I mean you 
cannot become a fantastic famous singer over a night; it involves a whole lot of practice, a 
whole lot of thinking, a whole lot of culturing of your voice and things like that. 
Programming is exactly that. In this connection I must tell you something that there are many
people who give up on programming thinking that it is not for them and I must tell you all 
something that to the best of what I have seen to the best of what is known already, 
programming is quite straight forward and comes with just few hours of practice but a huge 
deterrent for a programming is the de motivation which generally emanates from your 
surroundings or your inability to solve something and things like that. So what you must do is
go in baby steps, don’t try to do something very complicated in the beginning of your leaning
of the programming, go in baby steps and go as much as possible and talk to a whole lot of 
people, and off course as in always keep trying. Right? Nothing like it. Ahh you said about 
programming and how we go about it, how can mathematician make use of it? Even I am 
from math background. So you are from mathematics background, be it math, chemistry, 
economics, physics you name it. Today there is a requirement for all of us to calculate things 
to analyze things, right? Something as non trivial as how much water you intake every day? 
Right? What is your, what is the change in weight from the past three four years of an 
individual ok? What is the amount of carbohydrates that you take? Protein that you take? Can
can  have something to say about your health. To analyze this kind of data and to infer 
something you need programming so you see an nutrition specialist requires programming, 
see all though you have packages which can be used to get all these things done, you must 
keep in your mind that this packages have a programme inbuilt, because of which the 
package works and it sometimes helps for you to understand how to programme so that you 
can customize whatever you need to do as per your requirements. So i would say 
programming is definitely not a must for everyone but is a great add on to your skill no 
matter what you are doing and no matter what background you hale from.                 
MORE ON SCRATCH
We have now come to the flag end of our first chapter it’s time for us to summarise 
everything that we learnt so far ,we first saw how to make our cat move, how to make her 
rotate, what was the introduction to programming? And then I told you how to group a bunch 
of tasks? And there lies the heart of programming, right? we spoke about loops and variables 
and i told you how you can make the cat recite tables, then we went ahead and showed you a 
couple of fun examples using our newly learnt programming skills it is now time to see a few 
more topics in scratch which we will take up in the forth coming chapter. 
Hey you can see there are so many featured projects available in scratch, you can always 
explore them, but before we get into the details of how to design our own scratch game there 
are many important concepts available in scratch so let us have a look at them. 
Let us start with arithmetic operators. What are those? Pretty straight forward pull this, this 
side ok I have put this here now I will enter let say five here and six here and when I double 
click on this you see I get eleven, double click eleven. Double click eleven right? if you 
change this let’s say to fifteen and then double click, you will get five plus fifteen which is 
twenty ok and whatever is the result if you would want you can you can now put let’s say ten 
and eight here, double click you will get two. Ok now look at this, there is something more 
that you can do, let me delete ten here and let me put this here you see what happened? I 
repeat I can put this here do you see what’s happening here, I can put this here so five plus 
fifteen is twenty, twenty minus eight is, what is it? Whatever is the answer, you will see that 
here, it’s twelve correct? And I can go on doing this in fact I can take a subtraction thing and 
then I can divide the answer by two and I can pull this entire thing here like this, so you take 
this and place it here so it is five plus fifteen is twenty minus eight is twelve by two is six 
double click and you will see six ok? You can ease this, you can use these arithmetic 
operators the way you want and also there is an interesting function here, see what this does? 
Isn’t that self explanatory? I don’t have to explain this to you correct? It fix a random number
from one to ten double click ten, double click six again four, double click one double click 
six, double click four, double click one see it is very random it doesn’t follow any pattern ok 
don’t worry so much about how exactly this is done? That’s a very complicated subject all 
together but you please be aware of this very beautiful facility of scratch, which gives you a 
number between one to ten picked randomly. So it is not just limited to one to ten as you 
would have guessed you make this hundred it will pick a number from one to hundred, I just 
made this hundred right now double click you will get a random number twenty two between 
one to hundred twenty two, twenty three, fifty five, twenty three, fifty eight, seven, ninety 
seven, eighty five, eighty four you see there is no particular pattern, you can start from any 
number up to any number ask for a random number you will see we will using this a whole 
lot in our  explanation throughout our course we will be using this, right? So scratch is that 
way very interesting and very straight forward and self explanatory that you just see it you 
could guess what this function is ok, So let me do something very interesting then let me keep
this aside may be even delete this, let me do something interesting. Let me consider, I have to
pick a random number from one to hundred and put that here you see what I am doing and 
then pick another random number from one to hundred and put that here, and what is a result?
Double click on it one ninety so you pick a random number you pick a another random 
number, you are adding it double click one forty four so some of two random numbers pick 
between one to hundred is giving you some random number here and some random number 
here, is giving you so much ok ninety five, one sixty one, one thirty nine, hundred and so on 
in fact what you can do is you can make our cute cat recite these numbers, let’s see how she 
can do it? Go to looks, go to say hello keep it here double click on it she will say hello, you 
take whatever you want, you want her to call out my name? Hi sudarshan! Double click, she 
say ‘hi sudarshan’! What you can also do is delete this, can you guess what i am going to do 
next pick this and put this here what will she say now, she will tell you a random number the 
answer basically she less spit out one one two, twenty four, one forty four, seventy three and 
so on, one not four ok I can play around this and make this ok remove this what was this 
doing here? You see the pieces here I pick a random number from one to hundred this was not
required ten in ten not required, you can put whatever you want here, put whatever you want 
here and make the cat say, I will just make her say ten plus twenty, what is that? You all know
its thirty but let me see whether see says thirty or not, double click here and she says thirty 
hey! That’s right, so it so much fun to keep doing this you know the you can just try whatever
you want, go to the operators and do whatever kind of operations you want and then make her
say whatever you type right? Isn’t that awesome? Right so now it’s left for you to explore 
these things and now move onto the next topic. 
We will now make our cat ask your age and say something about you, what is that? What 
exactly does she ask for and what will she do based on your age? You should wait and see, ok
so now, let me teach you something go to operators and you see this join, this is nothing but 
two strings that you type here will be joined as the one string, you see you type let’s say my 
name here and a space and you type nptel it will show ‘sudarshan nptel’ ok, whatever you 
want you can put ok? New space and then Delhi here it will show you newdelhi ok? You put 
first space second it will show you first and second ok so of what use is this? Let me make 
the cat do something and then make it clear to you what could be an application of joining 
these two strings, let me now go to looks and take say and then let me create a variable called
name. Ok done so name will contain nothing to begin with as you know it always starts with 
zero set name to let say your name, my name I will put sudarshan space so name will be put 
as sudarshan and cat will say call out my name right now, you see what’s happening, it will 
say sudarshan but I want her to say hello sudarshan, how do i do that? Pretty simple. Remove 
this, Say hello here space and then put a name here it will say hello and whatever is the name 
said to sudarshan perfect! Now click on this, she will say ‘hello sudarshan’ is that clear? 
Perfect. So she now saying ‘hello sudarshan’ and then I want her to take my age let’s say I 
create a variable called age and I will set age to whatever is my age ok, age is now thirty five 
and I want her to tell me whether I am an adult or not? Off course I know I am adult, I am 
eighteen plus but I want the cat to decide whether that I am eighteen plus or not? How do I do
that? There is something called if look, an if look which does the following, so if the age is 
greater than or equal to eighteen how do I do that? Go to operators am being little fast here 
because I have a felling you are now, you people are now familiarising yourself with the 
scratch programming and you are way too comfortable with whatever I am doing right? If not
you may want to pause and then try it out yourself slowly and then see what is happening 
here ok? Ok. If the age is greater than seventeen, if age is greater than seventeen means what 
the age is greater than or equal to eighteen, seventeen is not allowed if the age is greater than 
seventeen then the cat will say, it says hey you are an adult, you can do anything you want, 
although this is not true you cannot do anything you want by anything you want I mean 
anything that is allowed for you to do right? But if the age is less than something it must say 
oh oh! You are not an adult. How do I do that? Go to control, go to if, go to data take your 
age, go to operators use this less than if age is less than eighteen which means seventeen 
sixteen fifteen and so on the cat must say, how do i make her say, cat must say oh oh! You are
still a kid! The world is not so open for you ok, now what happens if I execute this let’s see, i 
will click on it first ok, i should put a pause here you see that’s very important, control and i 
make cat wait for let say three seconds and i am going to set my name to sudarshan the cat 
will say ‘hello sudarshan’, it will wait for three seconds and age I am going to enter here 
based on what is my age it will say so and so ok let’s see, double click hello sudarshan wait 
for three seconds hey you are an adult you can do anything you want but if my age where to 
like say fifteen, I am far from fifteen but assuming that i am fifteen i double click on it, it will
now come here, off course say hello sudarshan wait for three seconds my age is fifteen now it
will come here, it will see that the my age is greater than seventeen no! Which means this will
not get executed my age is less than eighteen yes! Fifteen is less than eighteen so this will get
executed let’s see. Double click on this hello sudarshan wait for three seconds and then this 
will happen, ok if you are finding this a little confusing what I will do is I will separate this 
from this forget this for the time being will not worry about this we will only look at this 
code, if age is fifteen double click it says oh oh! You are still a kid, if age is ten what will be 
the answer? Age is less than eighteen off course this should get executed let’s see, double 
click yes! The same thing, if my age was twenty five then I am an adult it should say you are 
an adult double click yeah! You are an adult, you can do anything you want, now do you 
understand the importance of this loop? It just checks for a condition and does what you ask 
the cat to do here ok, now, let me add a small animation to it just for clarity, one second, hey 
you are an adult and move a few steps forward ok, it must move some twenty steps forward if
one is an adult so set age is twenty five which means this must get executed, it must move 
twenty steps ahead see it says and it moves ok, let me give it a pause so that it is visible to 
you people. Wait for a second and then move, see it moves it says hey! You are an adult and 
moves by twenty steps again double click says hey you are an adult and moves twenty steps 
but if I am ten year old double click it says oh oh you are still a kid world is not so open for 
you it doesn’t move ahead right? Because in my if loop here this gets executed and only this 
is displayed. Correct? Now if I were to take this and put this here let’s say wait for a second 
and then move twenty steps backwards so if you are not an adult which is by the way the case
here given that your age is ten she will move back a little ok, Let me say minus thirty, she 
obviously! Minus forty also so that she goes back twice the distance double click she goes 
back correct? Again double click she goes back correct? She says this and then goes back 
correct? But if it was some, if i was sixty here old she will call me an adult and go forward, if 
i was five year old, she will say I am not an adult and still a kid and she will go back. I 
believe you are seeing her move back here, five here let’s say forty she will move ahead 
correct? Perfect! May be, you may want to write this code and then check if it’s really 
working the way it working with me right and you may want to explore how if works with 
the different example and a small exercise for you all, what do you think the if then else loop 
does? This is called a loop ok? I told you how if then works, if then is what is given here you 
must tell me how if then else works? Go on. Before anything let me attach this here and try 
executing this programme for one last time with my age double click says ‘hello sudarshan’ 
and my age is given to be this and it moves forward and says you are an adult and you can do 
anything you want perfect! So let me move on to the next lesson. 
So it was a whole lot of fun learning scratch, I must tell you people that not everyone has this 
bend for programming in the beginning, it takes some time to seize in your minds and scratch
does that to your mind. You will have a clear understanding of how a loop works, we saw 
how a list works, what is a variable, what is a block? You see, block is something that 
repeatedly does a kind of instruction that you give and you can use that any where you want, 
it is actually called a functioning programming. Will see those details very soon, may be you 
are wondering, Is programming so much fun? In fact it is indeed so much fun but scratch 
makes it a whole lot of fun so now let’s switch our guess and look at python as a 
programming language trust me if you are very good at scratch you will not face any 
difficulty learning python. So you mean to say that there are lot of similarities in python and 
scratch, I would say that they are exactly the same although you will not have this facility of 
drag and then using repeat loop and things like that, scratch is made for eight year old, python
is lot more powerful and hence given that it lot more powerful the way you write a piece of 
code in python is very different and can be just a little more challenging than how you do it in
scratch.                                                                   
Introduction To Loops
We are on to discussing something very significant, important and a novel concept for a 
beginner ok. What is our ultimate aim? To make our cat recite five tables ok? And now I am 
going to introduce you people on what is called a variable? Ok. That’s what is the important 
significant thing for a programmer I was talking about. Go to data click on it, click on make a
variable, it will ask you for a name put any name you want now here is a confusing part you 
can put your name or you can simply put a letter you can simply enter whatever you want 
here, a word also let me simply enter “S” to begin with and click on ok, you will get a S here,
you saw the difference right? Correct? Now pull this aside and keep it here double click on it 
you will get a 0, a variable is always 0 unless otherwise initiated, what do i mean by that? I 
will tell you next, pull this this side it says set S to i will put 15 here which means when you 
double click on this S actually becomes 15, double click on this S we are getting 15 right? 
Also for your reference this shows, the variable value which is 15 here correct? Ok. Now 
when I, let me tell you what is change. When I say change S by 1 you will see what happens, 
double click on it S changes by 1 means S gets incremented by 1 ok? Double click on S you 
will see 16 now, you also see 16 here right? If you say change S by let’s say 20 what will 
happen? The existing value 16 will get added by 20, which makes it 36. You see you must 
practice a whole lot of handling variables, exercises; you should try playing around just this 
thing, just this much. Make a variable and try to see what exactly happens? Let us do a small 
exercises now let’s go to data create a variable, let me call it X. Create another variable, yes 
you can do as many as you want call it Y and you are done, you have X and Y correct? And 
let me set the values of X and Y, how do I set it? You go here, you will get all the current 
variables that you have defined X, I will set X to something, Y to something ok? Let me do 
that 10 and Y will be let’s say some 12 ok? You still see that X is 0, Y is 0 correct? Let me 
also keep them here as you know, you can keep these here double click and then see what 
their values are? It is 0. That is because I am not double clicked on this the moment I double 
click on this, this two get executed so double click now X will be 10 Y will be 12 as is 
evident here and also double click 10, 12 perfect! Now what I want to do is add these two 
variables, how do i do that? Go to operators you have an addition operator here, bring that 
here and then go back to data, bring set here create another variable namely Z you see what I 
am doing Z gets created. What is Z? Double click 0 ok? I am going to set Z to be X+Y how 
do I do that? First put X here then put Y here and then say set Z to X+Y and bingo!! You see 
what’s going to happen now? Double click on this Z is now 0 but double clicking on it will 
make X 10, Y 12, which already the case by the way and then will make Z become equal to 
Z+Y which is that should become 22 here, should become 22, let’s see what happens? Come 
here and then double click boom! See Z became 22, Z now is 22 correct? So you can do a 
whole lot of such operations here ok? Let’s do more for the sake of explaining things to you. I
want to subtract also ok? Subtract what from what? Go to data subtract let’s say X-Y ok? 
Double click on it you will get the answer but then if you want to set it on a new variable then
you should use set let me call it a new variable, make a variable, let’s say diff. Diff gets 
created please note variables need not necessarily be a letters it can even be words like this 
strings like this. So I am going to say set diff to be the difference so bring it here and then 
double click on it, now my difference will be X-Y whatever X was whatever Y was the 
difference will be diff perfect it showing -2 and you want this to be sequentially executed 
simply keep it here, now tell me what happens if I make X as 35 and Y as 15 what will 
happen to Z? It will be X+Y, Z should become 50. X is 35, Y is 15 why is it showing 10 and 
12 that is because I am yet to execute these things. Ok? Double click here and all these values
will change. X should become 35, Y should become 15, Z should become sum of X and Y 
which is 50 and diff should become the difference which is 35-15 what is it? 20. Correct? We 
must see 35, 15, 50 and 20 let’s see if this is visible? Double click boom! Yes perfect 35, 15 
50 and 20. So now you have understand how to set a variable to a value, perform a few 
operations assign the values to a new variable. Ok? Go back to operators explore all these 
things look at data you can create variable and use them to do whatever you want. So what 
was our mission? We wanted our cat to recite the five tables, how do we go about doing that? 
Let’s see. First let me go to data and create a variable let me call it‘t’‘t’ for tables 
multiplication tables ok? And then I want to set‘t’ to 5 and then I want t to change by 5 every 
time ok? And I want my cat to say these, how do I make her say this? Say hello so say go to 
data take t and out that here so you are making t=5 you change t by 5 no! I think before that 
we should make her say t and then you can change t by 5 and then make her say t once again 
how do i do that? Simply copy paste say t once again ok? Double click ‘t’ set to 5 and she 
says ‘t’ 5 and then changes ‘t’ by +5 and then says ‘t’ but this happen so fast you cannot see a 
five come here, let me try it once again. Oh see you can’t even see because it gets executed so
quick so what will I do? I will go to control and I will say wait one second, with this you will 
see that a 5 comes here, you wait for a second so that you see it and then t changes by +5 and 
then‘t’ is again displayed which is 10 let me see this, double click huh see 5 comes and then 
10 comes after a seconds time, double click 5 and then 10 so what should I do? I want this to 
repeat, what to repeat? Wait for one second change‘t’ by 5 and say‘t’. Right click on this and 
say duplicate you will get the same thing keep it down; this will now be 5, 10, 15 if you know
what i mean. Correct? Let me see double click 5, 10, 15 good my cat can say 5 tables up to 
5*3 is 15. Let me make her say up to 50 5*10 is 50 how do i do that? Keep copy pasting this 
below, right click duplicate, means you will get a duplicate of that keep pasting this below 
like this duplicate down, duplicate down, duplicate down, I have not kept a count of how 
many times I am saying let me double click and check. 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40 this is a 
dumb cat as I told you she will only do what is being instructed, she is not intelligent enough 
to understand that we want up to 50 and she must go up to 50. Unless and otherwise specified
she will not do it. So what need to be done now? Yes i must duplicate this just a couple of 
times and there I am, this makes it 10 says of‘t’ which changes by 5 every time and this must 
make our cat recite the 5 tables from 5 times 1 is 5 up to 5 times 10 is 50 so basically you see 
5, 10, 15, 20 up to 50 let see if she does it! Double click 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50 
hip hip hurray!!! There you are so we made our cat recite the 5 table. So we made her recite 
the 5 table from 5, 10, 15 up to 50 I have a feeling there is a better way to do this and what is 
that better way? Can you think? Can you try before proceeding any further? It will be a good 
exercise for you all. Now if not I am always there to help you, maybe we want to pause here 
and then try it to do it all by yourself, if not lets continue. Go to control and then look at this 
repeat, keep it here and then simply take, let me duplicate this I don’t want anything beyond 
this ok? Let me delete this I only want I want a set‘t’ to 5 to begin with and then repeat this 9 
times, repeat what? I want to say‘t’ first 5 is being said wait for about one second ok? And 
then again let me delete this i want the cat to say t after changing t by 5 ok? So see what i am 
going to do now change t by 5 and then say‘t’ and wait for one second and I am done! Let me
delete this and try explaining what I just did. ‘t’ will be 5, cat will say 5 we wait for one 
second and I then repeat this nine times ok? Which means i change t by 5 which means ‘t’ 
become 10 I say 10, I wait for one second and this happens nine times which means i will go 
on and recite the entire thing, correct? The same thing the same thing can be done in such a 
small piece of code, do you see the power of this repeat loop here but let’s see whether it does
or not? Double click and there we go 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50 yes we did exactly 
this bigger code equivalent by writing a small code correct? Ah is there any way I can even 
better this code let me try bettering this code. All of you observe, i duplicate this I go here I 
simply want to repeat something ten times repeat what ten times? I want the cat to say five 
first so for that t=5 and then I want this to be done inside, I don’t want any of these things, let 
me delete these things see what this code does first sets‘t’ to 5 and then repeats say t change 
by 5 and then waits for a second let me see whether it does what it is suppose to do. Double 
click 5, 10 so on let see whether its stops at 50 yes 35, 40, 45, 50. You are just wondering 
why exactly i did this, this looks exactly similar to this even does what this does but this will 
give me enormous amount of flexibility, and what is that. See what I am going to do I am 
gonna do small magic for you all. Click on make a variable and create ‘any’ I will type any 
here, ‘any’ is now a variable ok? And now I will set t to not 5 but any and I will change ‘t’ by 
not 5 but any and i will now set any to let’s say 7 pause the video observe the code, what 
exactly this code does? And then un pause play the video and see if you are right or not? Ok. 
I suppose you all pause the video and gave your guess now double clicking on this will 
simply give me 7 tables isn’t it? How? Let’s see whether it gives me 7 tables or not. Double 
click 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49, 63 and 70 this gave me 7 tables that because whatever was 
given here I tried replacing 5 by another variable which I could flexibly change, what do I 
mean by that? If you make this eight or nine let’s say it gives me the table for nine look at this
double click and i will get tables for 9 right? 27, 36, 45, 54, 63, 72, 81 and 90 that is basically
9 table in fact you can even make it recite 19th table which by the way I never learnt as a kid I
knew tables only up to 9, I dint even know 12 table but let me see whether it can recite 19 
table very unfortunately I will not be able to verify given that I don’t know by heart so this is 
going on I know we should stop on 190 let me see. 171, 190 perfect! So I now can make the 
cat recite any table which even I dint learn as a school kid.                                                  
Introduction To Scratch
So trust me on this, most of your questions can be solved once we start programming. Let us 
start from their basics and try to build up one step at a time; most of your questions cannot be 
answered in plain English although I have tried my level best to do that. You will realize that 
the best way to answer it is to experience it all by yourself. Ok. So let us not get going with 
our programming journey with the very nice online package called scratch. This actually a 
programming language and trust me the pre requisites, the age from where one can start using
this programming language is actually just eight. An eight year old can understanding this 
programming language really well and trust me it’s actually very addictive. Look at this little 
cat here and look at all the commands over here. You know these commands give this cat a 
whole lot of power and let’s see what exactly are the powers that you can enable the cat to 
perform something right? When you say move ten steps I think it’s obvious for you all. The 
moment you say move ten steps she must moves ten steps ahead so let me say move ten 
steps! Move ten steps, she is not moving! Probably there something else I must do. What is 
that? So it is double clicking on the “move 10 steps” that is what is going to make her move 
and if you change the 10 steps to 50 steps, I type 50 here; it’s going to make her move 50 
steps. How? Not by just clicking on this once but click on this twice. A good thing to do is 
possibly open this scratch window by going to scratch.mit.ed it is there in the description of 
this lesson and then you can try it all by yourself as I am trying it. So move “50 steps” she 
moves. In another time move 50 steps, she moves. Let me say move 100 times, 100 steps she 
moves 100 steps. I am going to pull her by the tale and bring her back, ok so again move 100 
steps, she moves. Move move perfect! And as you can see there are self explanatory stuff 
here. “Turn 15 degrees” says a command, when I keep it here and double click on it look she 
is going to move 15 degrees. Correct? Let me make her move completely right? She move 
she move she moves and finally she comes back to her original state ok? I can also move her 
in the opposite direction, I made her move clockwise, I can make her move antI clockwise, 
look at this double click, double click, double click she is moving and double click this she 
moves in the clock wise direction. Go ahead 100 steps, turn by 15 degrees go ahead 100 steps
turn 15 degrees, go ahead 100 steps turn by 15 degrees go ahead turn turn turn turn turn turn 
turn and then go ahead, you see I can command her using these commands. She went back let
me pull her back let me turn her she comes back to her original position. Ok. What have you 
learnt so far? You have learnt the following. Here is the cat and you can instruct her to move 
the way you want, the way you want here is basically the set of command given here, some of
them sound complicated but don’t worry with time you will be able to understand almost 
everything of what is given here. As of now we just learnt how to make her move ahead and 
how to make her turn the way we want. Let us end this lesson by making her turn by let’s say 
90 degrees so this will make her turn by 90 degrees, right? Again let’s say 70 degrees and I 
am just typing it here 70 and then again let’s say 80 degrees, 80 degrees and so on right? So 
now it’s time for you all not to go ahead with the next lesson but to open the scratch window 
and try playing around with her and make her move around, turn around, and do whatever 
you want. Sky is the limit as you can see and its whole lot of fun making her do stuff ok? You
can in fact explore other things here also, although we will be covering all these things it will 
be good if you can go ahead and look at this mini laboratory of how to programme a small 
unit graphical figure? We just now made the cat rotate; move around this was just the 
beginning. You can do a lot more with the scratch then this let us see more of it in the forth 
coming videos. 
We saw how we can make this cat move, rotate and things like that. Now what I am gonna 
tell you is what is called grouping these instructions? Some I am gonna group them you 
easily guess what that mean? Basically I just zoomed the commands but it’s easily visible for 
you. What I am going to do is, I am going to make her move by 100 steps and again move 
back by -100 steps, what is this mean? Clicking on this will make her move ahead, clicking 
on this will make her move back to her position it’s like go ahead 100 steps and come back 
by 100 steps. Right? Ok. And then let me say ‘I want her to turn by 90  degrees’, so when I 
click on this she turns by 90, again turns by 90, again turns by 90, and again turns by 90. So 
what I want her to do is let’s say first move 100 steps and then turn by 90 and again move by 
100 steps so I should bring back move once again keep it here make it 100 steps and then turn
by 90 degrees. What will this do? Let me keep this aside. So when I double click on this she 
will move back by -100 but when I double click on this she will perform all this 4 things 
continuously, simultaneously ok, so let me just remove this, this is not required I double click
on it and click on delete. ok? And it’s gone. So when I double click on this, the first one she 
will move 100 steps, rotate by 90 degrees and again move by 100 steps ahead and then rotate 
by 90 degrees, let us see whether this happens or not? Boom!! She comes here and then she 
settles here, we couldn’t we couldn’t recognise what exactly happened right? Now if I click 
on this once again she will move ahead by 100 rotate move ahead by100 rotate and stop. See 
that happened now. I click, she comes here, I click, She goes back the movement is so sudden
but we are unable to observe what’s happening? Right! So there is a way in which we can 
actually make her wait between the commands that is called if you click on control you will 
see what is called wait here, you can insert wait she will move ahead wait for one second and 
again rotate by 90 degrees, I want her to move, I wanted to wait her for one second once 
again and then move 100 steps and then again wait, ok now what will this do? Very simple 
see most of scratch is self explanatory, I would say all these video lessons are not so 
important. What is important is you should experiment with what stand for what? Now let me
double click on this, let’s see what happens? Self explanatory isn’t it? Move by 100 steps 
moved, waiting for one second move, rotate and stop! I repeat, move by 100 steps, rotate, 
move by 100 steps, rotate. Even that I have given one second time this is happened. Correct? 
What do I want? I want her to move ahead let’s say by 200 steps, what will happen right 
now? She will move a whole lot, rotate, move just a little 100 rotate and stop. So I want her 
to move 200 steps always and go back to her original position. She went away somewhere! 
Let me pull her back. So I wanted to start here move by 200 steps, she is somewhere here, 
rotate and then she will move, rotate and then she will move, rotate and then she will move, 
she will complete a loop you see, she should get back to her original position. So what do I 
do for that, self explanatory I should again make her to move by 200 steps, go to motion click
on it put move here move by 200 steps I want her to wait for a second, so go to control and 
then say wait for a second move by 200 steps and then again rotate right? You must again 
make her rotate by 90 degrees again I want a wait in between as you can see otherwise you 
cannot see her move, computer is very fast, the computer will make all these commands get 
executed in a fraction of a second you will not be able to see her move properly ok and again 
rotate by 90 degrees, lets revise. 200 she comes ahead, 90 degrees-she rotates, 200 steps, she 
comes down, 90 degrees-she rotates, 200 steps-she goes here, 90degrees-she rotates and 
again I must say move by 200 steps isn’t that right? She should move four times, once she 
goes straight, rotate and move she comes down, rotate and move she goes to the left, rotate 
and move she goes up once again control wait for a second tada! There we are just double 
click on this go, rotate, go, rotate, go rotate, go rotate. Ahh! She is not rotating because I am 
not rotating here so what I should do that the end I must make her rotate once again, so rotate 
by 90 degrees hip hip hurray!! We are done. Wait for one second and this will make her do 
the trick so but I will I will I am rotate her by 90 degrees right now otherwise she will not 
start from there, so I will create a new command just to rotate her by 90 now we are all set, 
bring her here and then double click on this, this is a separate command we can double click 
and she will rotate like this once twice thrice four times as when double click on this, this will
happen but when you double click here move, rotate, move, rotate, move rotate, move and 
then rotate is what’s happening right? These were the list of commands which made you write
your first programme, a set of instructions for this cat to move and complete a square. 
Remember the example of coffee, tea, 5 of them, 3 of them and things like that correct! I gave
you people instructions and you followed it remember? 2 coffee, 3 tea, cookies! 4 cookies 
and things like that right? Similarly I give him instructions, I give the cat instructions to 
rotate to move ahead few steps and he does that ok. We just saw how we can group a bunch 
of commands! And execute them in an instance. This is one of the most powerful concepts in 
computers and especially one of the aspects of programming that is worth appreciates it. You 
can write a long piece of code running through several consaflaince which will execute 
something very quickly, let’s say you click on your icon on your computer and the 
programme opens this particular thing is actually a piece of code, a long piece of code but it 
acts so instantly that you will not realise that it is so longer code that we double click and it 
gets executed in fraction of a second. Fine, now we will go ahead and understand what are 
called the looping structures. If you want to get a bunch of things done repeatedly there is a 
nice way of doing it in programming and let’s see more of it in forth coming sessions.             
SCRATCH ANIMATION 3
Who said programming is for geeks!? We just now illustrated that the programming is so 
much fun right? We saw a friend of ours doing jumping jacks we made him do repeatedly and
we also saw how we can make a flight land and take off right? So we will see one more fun 
exercise before we stop our adventure scratch. 
Hello guys, hope you would have seen a lot of fun filled activities that you can do using 
scratch, so you would have seen jumping jacks recently that is nothing but we are using some
two different images and we are alternating displaying them in a smart way that it appear to 
the user that the person is actually jumping, so something like that you can do a lot of cool 
stuff, sir has given you some exercises I suppose, please do try them also do explore still 
what all could be done, you use your creativity do a lot of stuffs and this is how you can 
improve your logical listening and the ability to get things done using a computer. So please 
do explore scratch to the fullest possible and in this programming screen cast we would see 
yet another fun activity, we are not going to use this cat in this I hope you had used the cat a 
lot you had made her do a lot of work so let me say this cat must be hidden, so I will hide her,
so in looks category you have an option ‘hide’ let me say hide and say double click on it, she 
is hidden done! So if not cat what am I going to use? So I am trying to stimulate eagle 
catching a snake, so this is what I am trying to stimulate, for that we need to check out the 
sprites for eagle and snake, some sprites are available in the library from scratch or you can 
also draw your a new sprite as per your wish or if you have an image file something like that 
you can upload it or you can readily take from your web cam as well. These are the options 
provided in scratch, I have an image file I am going to upload it because in this library I had 
checked animals category eagle snake is not provided in this library, so I am going to use 
image that I had taken from the internet ok, so let me that is available in my system right now
so let me go to it and let me download, I had downloaded and kept it so let me take that 
image, eagle ok and open it ok so I want the eagle to be positioned here so eagle would be 
flying in the sky right? So this gives an illumination that the eagle in the sky so I had 
positioned it here so roughly the co ordinates you can say one eighty six, one eighty nine so 
let me set it so that the eagle comes, if you want to repeat the exercise again and again the 
eagle comes back to this position and starts flying from this position, let me set the position 
for the eagle, set ‘x’ to one eighty six ok, and set ‘y’ to one twenty nine or may be slightly 
above one thirty ok? So given that I have set so eagle has come to this position see one eighty
six, one thirty two eagle has come to this position and I wanted to catch a snake, so we 
wanted a snake that is happy that is happily lying on the ground, the eagle has spotted the 
snake while flying and so it flies down, it will fly down and come and catch the snake. That is
what we wanted, so let us upload the image of the snake, for this the snake is very happy 
that’s what I said let me show you the image as well, first let me show you the image I guess 
it’s better if I can show you the image ok, so here in downloads I have it ok, so smile and cry 
there are actually two images see this is the image of the snake, see the snake is smiling 
right? So the snake has been smiling and happily lying on the ground so when the eagle 
catches the snake it shouldn’t remain happy, it should cry so when the eagle catches the snake
we should make it cry, so but how can we make it cry? Same old trick that we used in 
jumping jacks we will have another image of a crying snake and we let that particular snake 
appear when the eagle catches this snake and this snake would be hidden, this is what we are 
going to do. It will be clear as the programme proceeds, if you don’t clearly understand what 
I am telling now it will be clear don’t worry please observe it this is the smiling snake image 
that I had downloaded and another is a crying snake image ok let me, see the snake has been 
crying you can see the tears flowing from here. The snake has been crying see the snake is 
crying alright? So I am going to use these two images, I have to upload the images so let me 
click this icon to upload it from the file so my first is the smiling snake tats what I want 
smie.png file let me upload it so this particular snake, snake, I want it here see we had set the 
position for the eagle that is not visible when we click on the snake so please do understand 
that scratch treats each of the sprites as independent objects so when we want this particular 
snake to do something on the event of the eagle we need to use something on the event of the 
eagle doing something, we need to use the options given under this category events so in this 
programming screen cast you will learn about the options given here, how to make use of 
them this will be major take home lesson out of this programming screen cast ok? So this is 
the position we want our snake to be ok? Let me say this is our snake, this is in position 
minus one seventy nine minus one twenty nine so let me set it set ‘x’ so that ‘y’ do I set the 
position because in case if you want to repeat the experiment you cannot every time adjust 
the snake adjust the eagle to ask it to do as you wish, you wanted to get adjusted 
automatically you want to adjust once and set it once it is set that has to get adjusted 
automatically that is what you want them to do right? So that is why we are setting it, so ‘x’ is
minus one seventy nine and ‘y’ is minus one twenty nine so set ‘y’ to minus one twenty nine 
so if you don’t understand how the coordinates are being set please you can refer here the 
positions are shown here may be I will this particular portions, this particular place you can 
see the coordinates. Ok? So please note the coordinates minus one seventy nine and minus 
one twenty nine and this is the position we want our crying snake also to come so let me 
upload the crying snake to the name is cry.png this one let me upload it so crying snake has 
appeared here so let me set the position minus one seventy nine and minus one twenty nine 
let me set them set ‘x’ to minus one seventy nine and set ‘y’ to minus one twenty nine initially
I don’t want the crying snake to be, see now the smiling snake and crying snake are in the 
same position so it is imposed one above the other, super imposed so I don’t want the crying 
snake to appear now so let me hide it hide options is available in the looks that you would 
have seen in the cat right? Let we don’t need it so we had hidden it so let me hide it so now 
let me double click ok so the crying snake is hidden now alright. So now we have to start 
animating with the eagle so let us say the snake is happily lying on the ground the eagle has 
spotted the snake it has to fly down and catch the snake, so how would you instruct it to fly 
down? Move few steps it keeps moving in the straight line it can’t hit the snake so it has to 
move few steps slightly change its direction again move change its direction move change its 
direction this is how the eagle has to fly, this is how we have to instruct the eagle to fly, so let 
us do that. So in motion category we have this thing move ten steps for the eagle please note 
that all these instructions we are giving for the eagle so eagle so you can see the blue box 
around the eagle which denotes that this particular instruction are given for the eagle sprite 
ok? So move ten steps then I need to move in this direction so this would be approximately 
you go thirty backwards in the ‘x’ axis and ten backwards in the ‘y’ axis that is the direction I 
wanted, this is just an approximation let us see how it works in cast if it doesn’t works how 
we wanted we can adjust the parameters any time, this is just approximation an eye 
approximation that’s it so and also note that this may differ with respect to the images, I had 
taken some images if you have some other image the based on the image dimensions of how 
much space it takes, based on that this image is a smaller image so it takes  less space so for 
that these parameters may work but for any other image, if you take depends on that image 
parameters may change so it’s better you can, you try once and then you finalise the code 
that’s what I am going to do now to so I am asking it to move ten steps see it moves ten steps 
see it moving in the backward directions so I need to ask it to come here so I should say to 
change your x position you move change your x position and y position this is what I am 
going to say, change your ‘x’ position by this is your visual approximation I guess minus 
thirty and change your y position by minus ten I feel this would be better let us check how it 
goes ok yeah its approaching towards the snake see its approaching towards the snake so I 
keep clicking for each click it displaces by some amount of distance so I just, I need to use 
repeat loop so that it approaches here till the snake so let me use a repeat loop control repeat 
ten times, let me try with ten times so let me again restart. I set the eagle to the initial position
now let me repeat it ok, it has come half way so let us give a try for twenty times ok, let us 
give it a try now. It is in its initial position and let us give a cry, oh it is crossing the snake so 
let me try nineteen times because for ten it is not very closer to the snake and for twenty it is 
crossing. so I am slowly decreasing the value from twenty but it is just a hit and try last. I had
said it depends totally on the image whatever image you have downloaded based on that the 
things may change that’s why even I am showing you the hit and trial method. Ok so I had set
the eagle to the initial position let me execute this ok so it has touched the snake, no! Not 
fully right? This portion, this portion has to touch this is just the tail part has touched the 
snake so what should I do now? The ‘x’ position is perfect ‘y’ position it has to come slightly 
down that is the tail portion is touching the snake it has the eagle has to come down so that it 
can completely touch the snake, so I have to make it come down, to make it come down I 
should change the ‘y’ value ‘y’ position means the ‘y’ position controls whether it has to go 
up or down if you give a positive value it goes up for a negative value it goes down, similarly
‘x’ position is for left and right if an ‘x’ is given in an negative scale the object will move to 
the left and for the positive value it will move to the right. This is how the working is so I 
want it do come down so I should give a negative value of ‘y’ let me say I will experiment 
this is purely an experiment so let me experiment change ‘y’ by minus ten how far it moves, 
let me see ok, change y by minus ten ok? Let me again restart it is set to its initial position, let
me repeat. Ok perfect I guess now it’s perfect or shall we move still down we will try, ok let 
me make it minus twenty ok, it is set to the initial position let me repeat ok perfect it is now it
can easily bend down and take the snake that’s it means the snake is much reachable to the 
eagle currently so this position is perfect, so eagle has been moving like this so based on this, 
this snake has to cry so how will we do that? We have to hide the smiling snake and make the
crying snake appear, that is what we are going to do, so but in jumping jacks and here what is
the difference is in jumping jacks you had the alternating of pictures after few seconds so it is
alternated in a cycle something like that you had, you waited for sometime it has alternated in
a cycle but here the appearance of another image depends on some other event so event 
management is what we are going to do so when the here we have set the kite! Set the eagle 
ready to fly so let me say it has to pass a message, broadcast a message that is it has to pass a 
message but it has been it is flying so let me broadcast the message I can create a new 
message I will say flying so the eagle will broadcast a message that I am flying something 
like that so it is broadcasting the message that I am flying so given that it broadcasting the 
message only then the smiling snake has to come. And the crying snake has to be hidden if 
the message, broadcast message has been received so let us first configure that, it should not 
remain hidden if you so this it will remain hidden forever we want it to be hidden only till it 
is flying, till the eagle is flying the snake is unaware of the eagles arrival so it is smiling once 
the eagle has reached closer to the snake, only then that it starts crying only then the crying 
snake should appear till that it should be hidden, so when it is flying this crying snake has to 
hide that is what we wanted so when it is flying? How do we do that? Yeah we have a block 
when I receive flying so the eagle has been telling right I am flying so when it has been flying
the crying snake sprite can be hidden so this is achieved here and the smiling snake has to be 
shown if it has been flying means when the eagle has been flying in the sky, the smiling 
snake is not aware of it so it is happy so the smiling snake has to be sure so let me say when I 
receive flying when the smiling! The message flying is sent the smiling snake has to be 
shown so let me say show from the loops. So when it starts flying it sends out a message that 
I am flying so in that stage the snake is unaware of the eagle approaching it has to smile that 
is why the smiling snake sprite we had set it has, when I receive flying message it should be 
shown, I have to be shown and for the crying snake it is an opposite, if it is flying then no 
need for the snake to cry, if it is flying in the air so this has to be hidden so we have set it here
ok then ahh when the snake touches the eagle sorry I am sorry! When the eagle touches the 
snake the snake has to start crying so this snake has to disappear the smiling snake has to 
disappear and the crying snake has to appear so when it touches, how will these two come to 
know? If it is a living object they would know that someone is being touched, disturbing us 
all these they know they would react but here we have some images that’s it we are making 
the image behave as it is a real object so. how would we get things done here? So for that 
again same like how flying message have been sent we need to sent out  another broadcast 
message if this particular thing is touching this thing, so for that let me see touch is under 
sensing yeah! This colour is touching this colour something like that we have an option 
maybe we can use it if this colour is touching this colour let us use that, if some condition 
then that block we will use it now, we will use it so if some condition, the condition is if the 
colour is touching this colour so the colour you can change it, how would you change it is? 
You click on it and just check which colour you just wanted to appear, just click there you 
would get that colour see this colour is this the brown appeared here and now this colour 
should be this one ok green appeared here ok let us bring this, I am fitting here ok, if this 
colour is, if the brown colour touches this colour then it has to send out another message so 
for that again we are using the broadcast option but this time the message is not it’s flying, 
you have to send a new message so may be for the situation I will use ‘trapped’, so if it is 
sends out a message ‘trapped’ this snake will have to disappear, and the crying snake has to 
appear so I will configure it here, the smiling snake have to say when I receive ‘trapped’ it 
has to be hidden, so hide ok so we have configured the smiling snake let us go ahead with the
crying snake when I receive trapped its trapped this has to be shown so the crying, snake will 
cry but still will the eagle leave the snake? No, it will eat the snake, so let us wait for some 
time till the eagle eats the snake, so let us give a wait, wait for one second, one second is 
lesser for a living eagle but this is a computer image for this one second is too much so one 
second would be enough it would eaten the snake so after one second this has eaten the snake
the snake that would appear should disappear so again I will give a hide option, a hide option 
alright so hmmm I hope you are clear here if the crying snake has got means when the 
message trapped has been sent that is when it will be sent? When the particular colour, this 
portion of the eagle touches this portion, that is the eagle has touch with the snake so when it 
has touched the trapped message will be sent and because of the trapped message the smiling 
snake would disappear and the crying snake would appear, which makes the user fevered due 
to the eagle now caught the snake the snake is crying. So the crying snake would appear even
though the snake cries eagle would not leave it, it would definitely eat that snake so this is 
why we are given a wait loop, it cries but still the eagle is merciless it eats the snake and after
it has been eaten the snake should not appear here that’s why we are hiding it. So now here 
after it has been trapped the eagle will be happy that it has got a food so we need a sound 
effect there right? So let us have a sound effect, sounds you have an option here let’s see if 
we have something from the sound library something you can record it with your microphone
or if you have a sound file you can upload it as well these are the options available here. See, 
from the library animal I don’t have a eagle sound so that is why I had taken an eagle sound 
that I will be using it, I have a sound file basically I will be using it, you can get the eagle 
sound from the internet as well you can use it so eagle.mp3 this is my sound file let me open 
it and show you how the sound is, I will play, this is how the sound of the eagle will be hence 
it has caught the prey so that we are going to use it here so we have loaded the sound into our 
project ok once it has sent out a message that it has trapped it, it has to happily give the sound
that it has got the food so we have to insert a sound, play sound eagle! Yeah you have an 
option let us use it here, it will play this sound. So after it has played this sound the crying 
snake would appear and it will eat the snake and once the snake has been eaten that snake 
would disappear also the eagle would come back to its original position that is what we 
wanted to be done, so we have to wait for it to be eaten so once it is eat it has eaten the snake 
it will rest for some time and then it will fly back right? So let us give the wait loop but 
slightly more time than the snake, snake had got one second waiting time, that is one second 
it has eaten and one second let it take rest let me say wait for totally two seconds so there is a 
wait loop and once the wait is over it will again fly back so all these I have in pieces so this 
particular thing is nothing but I will create a blocks for it so I will say fly, fly is a block so 
this is my fly block and this I could say as target, target ok! So this would be my target block 
and or maybe I could club these two because if it is targeting it will come near the snake and 
it will stop that will never happens right? It will bounce opens the snake and it will eat it so I 
can club these two blocks as well so this is my target this is the flying part and this is the 
targeting of the snake part sp these are the two parts so now let me use these blocks initially 
the eagle has to been shown let me say show then it starts flying then it aims at the target then
once it has eaten the snake it is satisfied it will go away so that I am denoting by height that 
is, it has gone away, it has gone out of the frame so it has gone somewhere so I am hiding it 
so basically this is what I am trying to do this is the portion of smiling snake and the crying 
snake, ok let me check this how it works? Let me double click on this particular block which 
instructs it, wow! That was so good let me show once again, is the flying too fast? Do you 
feel that some more delay could be better so that you can feel that it is actually flying, it looks
like the eagle is running! So maybe we can insert a delay, this is the computerised image so 
obviously the speed of the computer is much higher than what! Other living beings are so 
definitely it would look as it is running so let me insert a delay so that appears as it is flying, 
one second is too much delay so let me use the delay loop but ok, let me say wait for point 
one second, that is better I guess zero point one seconds let me wait and now let me again run
this, let me double click wow! Now you could see that the eagle was flying just observe one 
second the eagle is flying it has touched the snake, the snake cry, still it ate the snake and then
once it is satisfied the eagle has also gone. See it doesn’t wait for me to given description, 
computers are so fast ok still we will try once again eagle is flying got the snake, snake 
crying, eaten eagle is flown fine! Wow this is so nice you can try in more creative versions of 
this as well you can do a lot of things with scratch please do explore a lot this would improve 
your logical reasoning ability and thanks for watching this screen cast have a nice day! That 
was again a lot of fun! Did you see how you could pick different pictures and make eagle 
catch a snake and then go forward right? So you can actually animate, have your own 
animations, put people over there and then create a story out of it, any more questions in 
mind? Sir any one can create animations? Absolutely yup, you can create a animation made a 
video out of it and put it on you tube as well, you should probably try doing that, you have 
any other challenging exercise in mind? How about this? A bus comes, there are four people 
are standing, a bus comes picks one person and goes away and same bus comes picks the 
second person and then goes away third person goes away, fourth person goes away that’s it. 
Each time number of people should reduced, should reduced yeah reduce by one ok? Try 
doing that and a good challenge would be make a ball bounce in that rectangle region where 
you animated, you create a ball which is an object and that ball should bounce around and 
stuff like that so you see there are actually many games written just using scratch, very 
beautiful games in fact they are addictive you can probably create snakes game, heard of 
snakes game yeah! Use your arrow keys and the snake moves the things like that a little 
complicated but it is not so difficult, you probably should try doing it, there are a whole lot of
live examples on scratch website itself where in you will be getting code on how exactly a 
game works and you can see through the code and understand how you can create a variant of
them.                                                                                                      
SOLUTION TO LOOPING PROBLEM
So I hope you people tried doing what I asked you to do, Right? If you dint? Don’t worry we 
are there to help you. How do we go about this? Here we are going to help you out with 
understanding of this really really involved computer science concept. The question that I 
asked in a previous video clip is not a very straight forward one, if you are not into 
programming already you should have found it very difficult to even understand what I was 
asking you to do. So don’t worry listen to me careful, let’s go step by step.
Firstly let me teach you what is this data thing here, click on it you will get these two things, 
click on make a variable and you will get, you will ask you will be asked to type in a variable 
name, let me now type a variable name as a num click on ok. So you see a num gets created 
here it is assigned zero and also num sits here, pull it and keep it here double click on it you 
will gets it value zero. So num is zero so I can set num to some number put this here, set num 
to ten when you do this and then execute this number is now ten you see its updated to ten 
here and when you go here and double click on this it will say ten, it will say ten correct? 
Now when you say change num by one and execute that num initially was set to ten and then 
you changed it by one which means by one means what you incremented ten by one and you 
get eleven double click on num you will see eleven correct? Let us double click on this once 
again this is just like these are all blocks of instruction you are giving right? Num is equal to 
eleven why don’t you double click on this? I double clicked go back you will see twelve here 
come back double click it becomes thirteen, double click fourteen, double click fifteen so 
what do I do? Look at this I will take go to this control and take a repeat loop and put this 
here can you guess what’s going to happen now? I repeat num was fifteen and I am going to 
change num by one ten times when I double click on this you see the computer is going to 
very quickly execute this piece of instruction ten times no no that is very certain thing we 
want to pause the video and think what’s happening here? One even parallelly try doing what 
exactly I am trying to do here right? It’s not so easy same time not very difficult it takes times
to this to sink it, I double click on this and you will see the magic happen, I double click num 
is fifteen now I am going to double click this, double clicking yeah I did it now immediately 
this became twenty five, why? That’s because num got incremented by one ten times, if I 
make this fifty then num gets incremented by one fifty times and so many double click on 
this I mean to double click by the way but if I double on this num will get incremented by 
fifty which means this becomes seventy five let me see double click boom! This became 
seventy five now what is more beautiful about this, these thing happen really really fast how 
fast? I put thousand here and you will see how quickly this becomes incremented by 
thousand, thousand num will get incremented one by one thousand times and hence this 
should become yes! One zero seven five now ready lets double click, double clicked quickly 
this became one zero seven five that why computers are very fascinating and programming a 
computer is more fascinating because the power is in your hands to make it compute, it 
computes really really fast, very very fast correct? Ok. So now let me do something I will set 
the number to zero ok? This is the part of this code now let me remove this, this doesn’t 
matter, double clicking on it as I told you will show you the existing numbers value but that’s 
there here itself so we don’t need to worry let me keep it here so I can see it properly and let 
me remove this, this is not useful now what will happen if I press this number will be 
assigned zero and then number will increment one at a time and will become thousand. These
things will happen so fast that you will not even notice what’s happening. Double click here 
you see it became thousand correct? Now let us go slowly and see what is happening here? 
You will be surprised that this is so easy to do, go to control go to wait and tog in wait here 
now you all know what is going to happen. Right? Set number to zero change number by one 
wait for one second so you can peacefully see how these changes one by one with the 
seconds pause in between, all of you I am sure you would have guessed what this is going to 
do. Let us double click and see what exactly it does, double click! And here its starts one two 
three four five six seven and so on, you see this it’s now incrementing it will go on like that 
till one thousand I don’t have so much time so let me just stop this come back instead of 
thousand let we make this just twenty and see what happens? So double click on this once 
again one two three you see this will go on till twenty, four five six seven eight nine ten you 
see as you can note you are basically creating a counter which changed one number every 
second so basically this takes twenty seconds. Correct? Twenty!! There you are hip hip 
hurray!! So we wrote a first neat code correct so this is what loop does, it helps you it gives 
you the power to repeat something repeatedly for a designated amount of time. Please note 
one thing that you should do and another thing you shouldn’t do, one thing you must do is 
you must pause and then write your own codes try to play around not just do what exactly we
did but do a lot more than what we are showing, play around and use all these things and try 
to understand what is what? You can always click on, let’s say u dint understand what is wait 
for one second right click on it you will get a help click on it and there you are, you get all the
details about that particular command wait specified number of seconds and continuous with 
next block with the example here correct? Let’s close this so you should try doing this that is 
what you are supposed to do and what you are not supposed to do is simply stick to what we 
are explaining you should not be doing that. We are using example to explain things so that 
we will motivate you to explore more stuff so please go ahead and explore a lot more things 
here before going any further only then can you understand programming really well so let’s 
get back to our original question. I was just going to teach you something that going to come 
very handy in solving this problem, what problem? The cat is trying to go ahead and come 
back and then keep going ahead and keeps coming back and then  it incrementally keeps 
moving like this and it get’s braver brave with time. Right? How do we programme that using
a repeat until loop? How do we avoid writing a huge code for it? Remember? It was going 
twenty steps at a time twenty first forty next and then back sixty next and then back so let us 
try doing that using repeat until the repeat lopper ok so I will take this repeat lopper and then 
put here and ten times I will make him go ahead, how do I do that? Motion move twenty 
steps, instead of twenty steps I will say twenty steps times one, twenty steps times two twenty
steps times three, how do I do that? I mean that sounds little complicated, let me figure this 
out on scratch. How do I do this? Let me go to data, create a variable called steps, steps is the 
number of steps that the cat takes and yeah there you are! Steps gets created and initially 
steps will be twenty and then I am gonna change steps by increments of twenty which means 
what does this do? See what this does. We discuss this when you double click on this you see 
this segment of code now is different, this segment of code is different when you double click
on this only this gets executed you all know that by this time correct? So when I click on this 
initially steps gets assigned by twenty ok? Double click steps is assigned by twenty and steps 
is changed by another twenty which is forty ok? And next if I again continue to say change 
steps by another twenty it becomes incremented by another twenty again if I say set oh I am 
sorry not set delete this change steps by twenty it will again get incremented by twenty ah! 
Well once again I need to gave control wait for a second between stop so that I can see what’s
happening? Correct? So what will this do? All of you? It’s only obvious once I click on this 
steps get to set to twenty go back see in one second it becomes forty one second sixty, one 
second eighty and then stops that’s precisely what I want this code to execute and give me a 
output like this correct? This is what I expected. And that’s precisely what it doing that right 
now, correct? Now what if I put this in a repeat loop, what happens? Ten times this entire 
things get’s executed, what get executed? That sounds very complex you see let me just keep 
it aside this is not using, we are not using this all though we will soon come to this cat go 
back ok. Let me execute this. What will this give me? Repeat ten times this entire thing, 
double click let me see twenty forty sixty eight, twenty forty sixty eighty is not visible 
because I am not putting a waits, wait here let me put that here forty sixty eighty, twenty forty
sixty eighty it keeps doing this ten times correct? As simple as that but then what if I want 
this up to let’s say thousand? How do I do this? I initially set steps by twenty and wait for a 
second and change steps by twenty and then let me remove this things and put a wait here but
then I will not set this to twenty here itself see what I am doing slowly and patiently I will set 
steps to twenty but then repeat this ten times so that it keeps incrementing twenty at a time 
what does this do? Let’s see double click on this you will see twenty forty sixty eighty 
hundred and so on hundred and twenty hundred and forty hundred and sixty and one eighty 
and finally two hundred correct? Two twenty oh its goes on its ten times right? So its Last 
one is actually two twenty we start with twenty so its two twenty, figure this out look at this 
code and see what it does it simply starts from twenty and ends in two twenty, what is the 
motive? What exactly am I doing? I have to move this cat incrementally right? Of what use of
all these things? Now we are going to use this, we are going to use this and make this cat 
move the way we want her to move let’s go back to this repeat and keep it here and what do I 
want the cat to do? I want basically a variable sets steps to twenty to come here sets steps to 
twenty and then what? I want her to move twenty steps ahead ok, instead of twenty I want to 
put steps here, what do I mean by steps here? I will take steps here and put this here please 
not what I am doing, is a need thing in scratch, nice facility in scratch. You set steps to twenty
and you move twenty steps, first just execute this, lets see what happens ten times click she 
keeps moving ahead, that’s what is expected with the pause of one second what happens 
now? Pull her back, what happens now? Double click, she moves ten steps, ten steps, ten 
steps steps is twenty move by twenty steps and then wait for a second ok? Keep doing this I 
can consider doing the following keep this here and then keep this here so that you set steps 
to twenty and then move twenty steps and then wait for a second move twenty steps correct? 
I was assigning steps to twenty here every time that’s not required initially if you assign that 
should be enough, double click ahead twenty twenty twenty twenty twenty so on ten times 
let’s watch her walk twenty twenty and then she stops of ten moments correct? Now what do 
we want? We want her actually go by twenty steps and come back by twenty steps you see so 
now what I should do? Is I should go back motion move twenty steps steps ahead and move 
back a few steps. Please note the steps is a built in thing here I mean By that I mean steps 
here means the cat should move so many steps we are also calling the variable steps here 
don’t be confused about it right? These two are actually different things here ok. So now she 
must move back by twenty steps how do we do that? Go to operators there is very nice 
facility here what is that? I can do multiplications of two things correct? I want to multiply 
minus one with data and take steps put that here I can multiply steps by minus one what do I 
mean by that? If steps is twenty steps times minus one is minus twenty so I make her move 
minus twenty steps so twenty steps ahead and twenty steps behind when I click on this, let me
remove all these things these are not required we delete them ok, when I double click on this 
you see what happens, she keeps going back and coming forward, going back and coming 
forward you can put a second pause here to make her go ahead come back go ahead come 
back she will do this ten times come back, up come back twice up come back four five six 
and so on correct? Ok. So she is doing! we are almost there but what exactly , you remember 
what exactly we wanted her to do? We wanted her to go ahead twenty steps, come back 
twenty steps go ahead forty steps next. So so so! What do I do? Come back to data think I 
should use change steps by twenty ok, people this is where the place where things are getting 
slightly complicated and I tell you the reasons why it’s getting complicated ok it’s because as 
I am going slightly fast off course it is the lecture videos but you have to liberty to pause the 
video and think about what I am saying, if you don’t do that I will be going on fast and fast 
right? So based on your taste and paste you may want to pause the video and then try yourself
how exactly you can make this cat move ahead and come back an incrementally keep doing 
this so what is this go to set steps by twenty repeat this ten times move steps number of steps 
that steps is actually twenty so move twenty steps, steps is a same twenty, so move twenty 
steps  wait for a second and move twenty steps in reverse direction minus twenty steps pause 
and then change steps by twenty means, steps is no more twenty it becomes forty here and 
then come back and start from here, you see I don’t again assign steps twenty here I come 
back here and then I continue. What is steps now? Is actually forty. So wait for a second you 
will move for forty wait for a second and then you move back by forty and so on and you will
be surprise to see that this is precisely what we wanted our cat to behave like. Double click 
twenty ahead twenty back, forty ahead forty back, sixty ahead sixty back, eighty ahead eighty
back, hundred ahead hundred back one twenty minus one twenty one forty minus one forty 
one sixty minus one sixty one eighty minus one eighty two hundred minus two hundred now 
that must tiring right? But the cat doesn’t get tired simply because it’s a computer programme
you can make her move the way you want her to move ok? Now can you play around these 
numbers here and make her move really fast and many numbers of times I leave it to you.      
Why To Learn Programming?
Now a day you have applications apps for everything. You have websites for everything, you
name it you have it, so why do you think we have to learn something about that because now
a day we have for all the utility you get something, you have applications. Again a good
question. So you see the fact that there are so many buildings isn’t a reason why you cannot
have a new building? Right! The fact that you have so many buildings doesn’t stop you from
understanding how buildings are made. May be you may want to go one floor up of an
existing building. Right! So if you understand how one can programme? There are a whole
lot of situations where you will feel something is missing here and I can go on and do add on
to it, right? That can happen if you know the background programming that they have used.
See it’s not an absolute must for everyone to know programming. But you to have an edge in
your respective subject programming is a must. Be it you said you are from mathematics
background, physics background, economics, assume you are doing business a small scale
business still knowing how to write a piece of code and get things done comes a long way in
helping you to have that extra edge over others. Right! Forget others to do something that is
out  of  the  box  and  out  of  the  knob,  you  need  to  understand  how  to  programming,
programming is one skill that helps you get things done really really fast, I am doing to
illustrate this very soon with you people by using test cases, where you will realise that
without programming you cannot imagine getting o things done.            
What Is Programming?
So I will give you a quick illustration on what is programming? Ok. I am going to programme
you people right now, ok. Look at this, I am going to show you my hand, if I show you in this
hand, if I say this it means coffee, if I say this two it means tea ,this is water. Can we play this
game now? Yeah yeah. Coffee! Water, Tea, water, coffee, tea, water. Ok.  Let me add a two
more items to it. Coffee, tea, water, juice, cookies. Can you remember? Yeah. Tea, tea, water,
juice, cookies, Water, cookies, juice, tea, he is copying. Ah! Juice, cookies, tea, ok. So let’s
add a small variant to this. You see what happened? I told them to make these assignments for
these symbols and they did the assignment. As I was showing them this numbers they could
easily say what they represent. How about this? I will show the item using these fingers,
whatever coffee, tea, water, juice, cookie and in this hand I will show the number of coffee
that I want, number of coffee cups basically. If I say this, it means three cups of coffee, If I do
this, quick! Five cookies perfect! Shall we go ahead? Three cops of water, three cups of
water. I think he has not quoted right, let him do it, you remain silent ok? Oye! I can’t see
from this side. Two cups of juice, yeah! Two cups of juice where you took some time for me
to figure out ok! What is this? Four cups of tea, Very nice. One cup of tea, one cup of coffee,
four cups of juice, two cups of!!Two cookies, two cookies and so on. So what I just now did
is like I programmed their minds to follow a particular code line of thought and then they
could figure out what I mean by this. What I meant by this and things like that. So whenever I
show this to sowjanya it means help me with two cups of tea, I am sorry four cups of tea. If I
say this it means help me with two cookies. Correct! So on and so for so symbolically we can
represent an item with something and I just programmed their minds to follow a particular
rule. Right? Ok. Probably you wondering what has this to do with the programming? I am
just trying to get your minds started on what one means by giving instructions. Programming
is all about that.              
